INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SATELLITE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING
Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. 2018; 00:1­16
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/sat

    Estimation and Cancellation of Transponder Distortions in
        Satellite Forward Links Using Memory Polynomials§

                                           Svilen Dimitrov

                German Aerospace Center (DLR), Satellite Networks Department, 82234 Wessling, Germany

                                                         SUMMARY
In this paper, a practical realization of a non-linear equalizer with distortion cancellation at a satellite receiver
is studied, using a memory polynomial model for channel estimation and distortion cancellation. Varying
the memory depth and the non-linear order of the memory polynomial model, the packet-error rate (PER)
performance of this non-linear equalizer is compared to the standard fractionally-spaced linear adaptive
equalizer, as well as to a setup of the non-linear equalizer with ideal channel knowledge at the receiver.
In a single-carrier transponder setup similar to the direct-to-home (DTH) broadcast DVB-S2X reference
scenario, the improved receiver with linear and non-linear equalization and practical channel estimation is
shown to consistently approach the PER performance of the setup with ideal channel knowledge when
increasing the memory depth and the non-linear order. The improved receiver demonstrates superior
performance as compared to the standard fractionally-spaced linear adaptive equalizer with up to 5.48-dB
energy efficiency gain for 64-APSK for a practical memory polynomial setup. Furthermore, it enables the
use of high-order modulation up to 256-APSK in this scenario, improving significantly the spectral efficiency
of the air interface. Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received . . .

KEY WORDS: Satellite communications; non-linear distortion; equalization; memory polynomial; high-
                     order modulation; energy efficiency.

                                              1. INTRODUCTION

With the extension of the second-generation digital video broadcasting system for satellite
broadcasting and unicasting (DVB-S2X) standard [1], high-throughput-satellite (HTS) systems
advance towards more bandwidth-demanding applications and services, e.g., direct-to-home (DTH)
4K television broadcasting or broadband interactive Internet protocol (IP) services for very-small-
aperture terminals (VSATs), emerging markets for mobile satellite platforms, such as broadband
connectivity on airplanes, cruise ships and trains, as well as professional applications. Transmission

Correspondence to: German Aerospace Center (DLR), Satellite Networks Department, 82234 Wessling, Germany. E-
mail: svilen.dimitrov@dlr.de
§This is the pre-peer reviewed version of the following article: Dimitrov S., Estimation and Cancellation of Transponder
Distortions in Satellite Forward Links Using Memory Polynomials, Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw., Apr. 2018, which
has been published in final form at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sat.1239. This article may be used for non-
commercial purposes in accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Self-Archiving.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Prepared using satauth.cls [Version: 2010/05/13 v2.00]
2                                         S. DIMITROV

over satellite is known to suffer from linear and non-linear signal distortions due to limitations
of the onboard satellite transponder. In the forward-link, for example, in order to maximize the
spectral efficiency, state-of-the-art satellite communication systems resort to using a very low carrier
roll-off and high symbol baud rates close to the maximum transponder bandwidth [2]. Due to
imperfect magnitude and group-delay responses of the input-multiplexing (IMUX) and output-
multiplexing (OMUX) onboard filters, however, linear distortion is introduced in the form of inter-
symbol interference (ISI). In addition, due to the power limitation of the satellite and operation
of the travelling wave tube amplifier (TWTA) close to saturation, waveforms with higher-order
modulation and multiple amplitude rings, e.g., 256-APSK, suffer from non-linear distortion in the
form of constellation warping and clustering at the receiver demodulator. Without adequate channel
compensation techniques, these adverse effects can reduce the spectral efficiency gains in the air
interface expected with the application of tighter roll-off factors, higher symbol rates, and higher
modulation orders.

  Non-linear compensation schemes include a number of pre-distortion techniques at the trans-
mitter, such as signal pre-distortion [3], [4], [5] and data pre-distortion [3], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10].
Signal pre-distortion [3] is commonly used for amplifier linearization. A solution against spectral
regrowth is band-limited signal pre-distortion [4], [5] which applies digital filters to the out-of-
band components and compensates the effect of the non-linear device on the in-band portion of the
signal. Data pre-distortion [3], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10] is applied to the constellation symbols prior to
pulse shaping, and it preserves the signal spectrum. Static data pre-distortion [2], [3], [6], [9] is the
state-of-the-art solution in DVB-S2X. It accounts for static nonlinearities in the channel, whereby
the transmitted constellation is modified such that the received centroids are close to the original
transmitted constellation. Dynamic data pre-distortion [6], [7], [8], [9], [10] compensates in addition
the memory effects in the channel. It takes into account the current symbol, as well as symbols
preceding and succeeding each symbol. A common approach to handle the ISI is equalization at
the receiver [3], where knowledge of the channel, obtained for instance by channel estimation, is
used to minimize the ISI. A fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer has been introduced in the
DVB-S2X receiver [2].

  Pre-distortion at the transmitter has been shown to be an effective channel compensation
technique for a multi-carrier transponder in [10]. However, in a single-carrier transponder, symbol-
based equalization with non-linear distortion cancellation at the receiver has shown significantly
better results [11]. Decision-directed equalization [12] applied at the receiver is known to provide
very good performance in channels with memory. A turbo equalizer using soft information exchange
with the low-density parity check (LDPC) decoder has been proposed for application over non-linear
satellite channels in [13]. A novel symbol-based equalizer with non-linear distortion cancellation,
introduced in [14], reduces the complexity of the receiver by using maximum likelihood (ML)
demodulation with hard decision in the cancellation loop with only marginal degradation of packet-
error rate (PER) performance [11] in the single-carrier satellite forward link. Both approaches
assume perfect channel knowledge at the receiver for estimation and cancellation of the non-linear
distortion. In [11], knowledge of the transponder characteristics is assumed at the receiver, i.e.,
measured magnitude and group delay responses of the IMUX/OMUX filters, as well as the input
amplitude/output amplitude (AM/AM) and input amplitude/output phase (AM/PM) characteristics
of the TWTA. While such information can be obtained before the commission of the satellite, diurnal

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.               Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                        DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.  3

changes in the responses of the analog filters and variation of the output back-off (OBO) in the
satellite transponder require channel estimation at the receiver.

  In this paper, symbol-based equalization with non-linear distortion cancellation is studied
for application in the satellite receiver, using practical channel estimation based on a memory
polynomial model. The PER performance of the receiver is evaluated for the single-carrier
transponder setup similar to the DTH reference scenario specified in the DVB-S2X implementation
guidelines [2] for a high baud rate of 34 MBaud and a low carrier roll-off factor of 5% in a 36-
MHz transponder. Modulation orders of 16-APSK, 32-APSK, 64-APSK, 128-APSK, and 256-APSK
are simulated with a 3/4-rate LDPC code. A number of memory polynomial setups are evaluated,
varying the memory depth and the non-linear order, to show the trade-off between PER performance
and complexity. The PER performance of the standard fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer
is also simulated to provide reference for the improvements. In addition, the ideal performance of
the non-linear equalizer is also included, assuming knowledge of the exact characteristics of the
IMUX/OMUX filters and the TWTA at the receiver. The practical channel estimation based on
the memory polynomial model is shown to consistently approach the PER performance of ideal
channel knowledge at the receiver with the increase of the memory depth and the non-linear order.
As compared to standard linear equalization, the non-linear equalizer enables the use of the higher
modulation orders of 128-APSK and 256-APSK, and shows significant energy efficiency gains of,
e.g., 5.48 dB for 64-APSK, using a memory polynomial model with memory depth of 10 and non-
linear order of 5. The non-linear equalizer is particularly suitable for application in waveforms
with higher-order modulation, low roll-off factors and high symbol rates close to the limits of the
transponder bandwidth, improving the spectral efficiency of the air interface.

  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the satellite system model,
including the transmission chain and the channel modelling. Section 3 describes the studied channel
compensation algorithms at the receiver. Section 4 presents the performance evaluation results.
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

                                      2. SATELLITE SYSTEM MODEL

In a satellite communication system, a gateway relays message signals designated to user terminals
over a satellite. In this section, the satellite transmission chain in the forward link and the satellite
channel model are presented.

2.1. Satellite Transmission Chain

The block diagram of the satellite transmission chain is presented in Fig. 1. At the gateway
transmitter, a stream of data packets with 1504 bits per packet are encoded by means of a
forward error correction (FEC) scheme, and modulated for transmission. In DVB-S2X [1], first,
a Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) encoder is applied, followed by an LDPC encoder and bit
interleaver. The resulting FEC frame with length of up to 64800 bits is mapped to symbols, using
APSK modulation with constellations up to 256-APSK at the modulator. The modulated symbols
are grouped in physical-layer (PL) frames with up to 67920 symbols per PL frame.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                           DOI: 10.1002/sat
4                                         S. DIMITROV

   Figure 1. Block diagram of the satellite transmission chain in the forward link.

  The DVB-S2X transmitter employs static data pre-distortion [2], [3], [6], [9] to compensate
constellation warping effects due to non-linear distortion at the satellite transponder. The symbols
are pulse shaped by means of a square root raised cosine filter (SRRCF), in order to ensure spectrum
integrity of the waveform for RF transmission over the feeder link. In the analog front-end, after
digital-to-analog conversion (DAC), the baseband signal is up-converted to the carrier frequency,
e.g., in the Ka band. Finally, the signal is amplified by means of a high-power amplifier (HPA) at
the gateway, and is transmitted over the feeder link through the uplink atmospheric channel.

  At the transponder onboard the satellite, the signal is passed through an IMUX filter, is amplified
by a TWTA, and is passed through an OMUX filter in order to guarantee spectrum integrity
for transmission over the user link. Here, the imperfect frequency responses of the IMUX and
OMUX filters introduce linear distortion in the form of ISI, while the TWTA introduces non-linear
distortion. The signal is then transmitted over the downlink atmospheric channel.

  At the user terminal receiver, the signal is amplified by means of an LNA, and is down-converted
to baseband. Next, an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and a matched SRRCF are applied. After
timing, frame synchronization and channel estimation, the symbols are passed through a linear
equalizer to counter the linear distortion. A fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer with 42
complex-valued taps is applied, working at twice the symbol rate. The symbols are then down-
sampled to the Nyquist rate. Finally, the demodulator and the decoder recover the received data
packets. Here, a soft demapper generates log-likelihood ratios (LLRs), which after deinterleaving
are provided as input to the decoding stages, i.e., an LDPC decoder, followed by a BCH decoder.

  A number of simplifications of the satellite transmission chain in the forward link can be
considered, preserving all key aspects that affect the physical layer performance. The free-space
signal propagation can be characterized as a slow-fading process due to rainy weather, and is handled
by means of adaptive coding and modulation (ACM), as well as a fading margin in the link budget.
The flat gain of the atmospheric satellite channel is also a factor in the link budget, included in the
calculation of the available SNR at the receiver. Since the physical layer performance is evaluated
as a function of the SNR, unity atmospheric channel gain is considered in the simulations presented
in Section 4. Since the HPA at the gateway is operated in the linear regime, the nonlinearity in the
satellite channel is introduced primarily by the TWTA. The transmitter and receiver are assumed
to be fine synchronized, i.e., genie-aided synchronization is performed based on correlation with
the transmitted signal, ideally assumed to be known. In general, the signal is also distorted by phase
noise at the receiver due to local oscillator instabilities during frequency conversion. However, since
fine phase compensation for higher-order modulation is still an open issue [2], [6], and the focus of

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.               Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                        DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.                  5

this paper is on compensation of the linear and non-linear distortions of the satellite transponder,

phase noise is not considered in the channel modeling.

As a result, the received PL frame at the input of the demodulator at the user terminal receiver

can be expressed as:

x(0)  =     {           [                   F  (          hSRRCF        { })  +    ]}  (1)
         Eq hSRRCF       hOMUX                  hIMUX               Pre x        w,

where x is the transmitted symbol vector in baseband, Pre {·} is the applied static pre-distortion
operator, hSRRCF is the impulse response vector of the SRRCF filter, and hIMUX is the impulse
response of the IMUX filter. The non-linear transfer function of the TWTA is denoted as F (·),
hOMUX is the impulse response of the OMUX filter, w is a vector with samples of additive white
Gaussian noise (AWGN), and Eq {·} is the linear equalizer operator. In this baseband model, the
transmitted signal x has an average energy per symbol of Es, and the AWGN w has a power
spectral density of N0. In addition, the responses of the SRRCFs and the IMUX/OMUX filters
are normalized for unity average power. The same applies for the pre-distorter and the equalizer.
Finally, the amplifier function is normalized for unity peak power.

2.2. Satellite Channel Modelling

In the satellite forward link, the main sources of distortion are the imperfect characteristics of the
IMUX and OMUX filters and the non-linear TWTA response. Measured magnitude and group-
delay responses of the IMUX and OMUX filters in the satellite transponder have been provided
as a reference in the DVB-S2X implementation guidelines [2], as shown in Fig. 2. While the
guidelines only specify the set of characteristics of a 36-MHz transponder, the filter responses are
equally applicable to a 225-MHz transponder by using appropriately specified scaling factors for the
frequency axis. The IMUX/OMUX filters introduce linear distortion in the form of memory effects
due to frequency selectivity at high baud rates, which corrupts the matched filtering at the receiver
and amplifies the AWGN.

  In this study, a not-linearized TWTA is considered to evaluate the performance of the non-
linear equalizer in a highly non-linear channel. This is similar to the DTH scenario specified
in the DVB-S2X implementation guidelines [2]. The AM/AM and AM/PM characteristics are
presented in Fig. 3, and are denoted as A(·) and (·), respectively. They only depend on the
signal amplitude. [As a result, the o]utput signal after the TWTA, F (s), can be expressed as
F (s) = A(|s|) exp j(|s|) + j arg(s) , where s is the input signal.

  In order to facilitate an efficient energy consumption onboard the satellite, it is desirable to
operate the TWTA close to saturation. In this non-linear regime, signals from higher-order APSK
constellations are known to suffer from non-linear distortions. Therefore, an OBO is applied to shift
the power transfer towards the linear regime at the cost of a penalty in the energy efficiency. The
OBO is defined as the ratio between the peak output power of the amplifier and the average output
power of the signal in the linear domain [14]. The non-linear distortion introduced by the TWTA
can be described as constellation warping and symbol clustering at the input of the demodulator at
the receiver [6]. The interfering component is dependent on the signal waveform, and therefore
contains useful information. In single-carrier digital transmission schemes, as well as in multi-
carrier transmission with a small number of carriers, the interfering component is correlated with

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                  Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                           DOI: 10.1002/sat
6                                         S. DIMITROV

               (a) Magnitude and group delay responses of IMUX filter.

              (b) Magnitude and group delay responses of OMUX filter.
   Figure 2. Filter characteristics of a 36-MHz satellite transponder in the forward link.

   Figure 3. AM/AM and AM/PM transfer characteristics of a not-linearized TWTA.

the transmitted symbols. The received symbols can be decomposed in an attenuated and rotated
replica of the transmitted symbols plus non-linear distortion noise. Each received centroid can
be individually warped, i.e., it is scaled by a complex-valued factor relative to the transmitted

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.               Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                        DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.  7

constellation point. There is no general assumption on the distribution of the non-linear distortion
noise.

                 3. RECEIVER ALGORITHMS FOR CHANNEL COMPENSATION

In this section, the state-of-the-art channel compensation algorithms at the receiver are discussed. A
non-linear symbol-based equalizer performing distortion estimation and cancellation by means of
a memory polynomial model is proposed as an addition to the fractionally-spaced adaptive linear
equalizer specified in the DVB-S2X implementation guidelines [2]. The building blocks of the non-
linear equalizer, including the channel estimation and training blocks, are defined.

3.1. State of the Art

In literature, the non-linear compensation solutions include a variety of pre-distortion techniques
at the transmitter, such as signal pre-distortion [3], band-limited signal pre-distortion [4], [5], and
data pre-distortion [3], [6], [7], [8], [9]. In scenarios, where measured models of the transponder
characteristics are unavailable or change over time, the pre-distorter function can be computed
adaptively using indirect learning [7], [8] or direct learning algorithms [8]. For this purpose,
a model for the non-linear channel with memory is required, e.g., a Volterra series [15] or a
memory polynomial model [7], [8], [16]. In data pre-distortion algorithms, these models include
the linear and non-linear blocks along the chain, e.g., the pulse shaping SRRCF at the transmitter,
the IMUX/OMUX filters, the TWTA, and the matched SRRCF at the receiver.

  In order to compensate the linear distortion introduced by the imperfect magnitude and group
delay responses of the IMUX/OMUX filters onboard the satellite, a fractionally-spaced adaptive
linear equalizer with 42 taps working at twice the symbol rate has been introduced in DVB-S2X [2].
In order to also compensate non-linear distortions, decision-directed detection by means of turbo
equalization has been proposed for application in non-linear satellite channels in [13]. A channel
model based on Volterra series is assumed, and minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) filters are
computed to cancel the non-linear terms in an iterative fashion, using soft information exchange with
the LDPC decoder. In [14], the symbol-based iterative equalization scheme has been introduced
which reduces the complexity of the receiver by means of a simplified model for the received
symbols after the non-linear device, and by using ML demodulation with hard decision in the
cancellation loop. Instead of computing MMSE filters for every component in the Volterra series,
a simple procedure can be applied to reconstruct and cancel the non-linear noise component. At
the heart of the simplification is a first-order decomposition of the received symbols at the input of
the demodulator, based on a symbol scaling factor representing the warping effect and a non-linear
noise component containing the higher non-linear orders. In addition to non-linear compensation,
memory effects in the form of ISI are also taken into account in the reconstruction and cancellation
of the interfering component due to the fact that the equalizer operates on a large block of symbols,
e.g., a PL frame. This equalizer has been shown to be an effective technique to compensate non-
linear distortions in the satellite channel, and to significantly reduce the SNR penalty with respect
to the linear channel [14], [17], [18], [11].

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                           DOI: 10.1002/sat
8                                            S. DIMITROV

  In previous work [14], [17], [18], [11], known measured models for the distortion sources have
been used in the estimation and cancellation of the non-linear noise performed by the symbol-based
equalizer. These include the linear and non-linear distortions in the satellite transponder due to the
IMUX filter, TWTA, and OMUX filter, such as the measured AM/AM and AM/PM characteristics
of the TWTA and the measured magnitude and group delay responses of the IMUX and OMUX
filters, obtained before the commission of each satellite. In this paper, the application of a memory
polynomial model [7], [8], [16] is considered at the receiver, in order to estimate the non-linear
channel with memory. As a result, the non-linear equalizer can compensate the slow time-variant
changes in the transponder characteristics, such as diurnal changes in the responses of the analog
filters or variations in the OBO.

  The proposed equalizer estimates and cancels the interference in the non-linear channel with
memory based on detection of the symbols at the receiver. In the satellite forward link, user terminal
normally receives the signal on a single carrier, unless multiple tuners are assumed. As a result, it
can only compensate the self-interference within that carrier, in the form of ISI, caused during the
transmission over the non-linear channel with memory. Therefore, the proposed equalizer is best
suitable for single-carrier scenarios in the satellite forward link. It can also be applied in a multi-
carrier scenario in combination with a pre-distortion technique at the transmitter that compensates
the IMI. In this case, the proposed equalizer can further minimize the residual self-interference
within the received carrier.

3.2. Fractionally-spaced Adaptive Linear Equalizer

In order to compensate the memory effects in the channel, an adaptive linear equalizer is applied
at twice the symbol rate. The symbol column vector at the output of the linear equalizer can
be expressed as x(0) = Eq {y} = y  eT , where Eq {·} is the equalizer operator,  is the linear
convolution operator, (·)T is the transpose operator, y is the symbol column vector at the input of
the linear equalizer, and e is the row vector with the equalizer taps. These taps are updated in a
data-aided manner, e.g., by using the following adaptive recursive algorithm [12]:

                                  el+1    =  el  -  µ  (    ylT  -    )  yl,              (2)
                                                        el          xl

w[ here el+1 is th]e updated equalizer tap vector after the l-th training symbol xl, el =
 e0, e1, ..., eNEQ-1 contains NEQ taps, initialized as the zero vector e0 = [0, ..., 0]. The window

row v[ector containing N] EQ =    42 samples of the         received symbol vector        y is denoted as
yl = yl, yl-1, ..., yl-NEQ , and  is initialized as y0      = [y0, 0, ..., 0]. Here, (·)  denotes complex

conjugation. With values between 0 and 1, the step size µ represents a trade-off between convergence

speed and stability, e.g., µ = 0.001.

3.3. Non-linear Equalizer with Distortion Cancellation Using a Memory Polynomial Model

In order to improve the performance of the receiver, a non-linear equalizer performing estimation
and cancellation of the transponder distortions is added after the fractionally-spaced adaptive linear
equalizer. The block diagram of the improved receiver is presented in Fig. 4. The symbols at the
output of the linear equalizer, downsampled to the Nyquist rate, are provided as input to the iterative

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                      Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                                               DOI: 10.1002/sat
               EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.                        9

Figure 4. Block diagram of the proposed receiver using a symbol-based equalizer with non-linear distortion
                                        cancellation in the satellite forward link.

non-linear equalizer. At this point, a set of received symbols, e.g., a received PL frame x(0), is
buffered.

  As a first step of the processing, detection is performed. The received symbols are ML
demodulated by means of a hard decision using the received constellation centroids as a[ referen]ce.
The vector of detected symbols used in the i-th iteration is denoted as x(i-1) = Demod x(i-1) .

  The estimate of the interfering component is obtained through subtraction of two terms. To obtain
the first term, the detected symbols are scaled by individual attenuation factors, Kcm, according to
the respective detected constellation point cm, m = 1, ..., M , with M being the modulation order, to
obtain x¯(i-1), where x¯(cim-1) = Kcm xc(im-1). This is essential to account for the constellation warping
effects. The individual scaling factors represent the ratio of a received centroid to the corresponding
transmitted constellation point.

  To obtain the second term, the detected symbols x(i-1) are used to estimate the distorted received
symbols using the memory polynomial model [7], [8], [16]:

                                  {}          K   Q                           q)|k-1,
                               M x(n)
                      y(n)  =             =           akq  x(n  -  q)|x(n  -                                (3)

                                             k=1 q=0

where x(n) is the input sequence with length of N symbols, n = 0, ..., N - 1, y(n) is the output

sequence, K is the non-linear order, Q is the memory depth, and akq is the complex-valued

coefficient associated with the term with non-linear order k, k = 1, ..., K, at time q, q = 0, ..., Q.

In practice, only the odd non-linear orders are sufficient to describe the nonlinearity. Similarly to

the fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer, the memory polynomial model is trained at twice

the symbol rate.The training can be performed, e.g., by solving the indirect learning problem [7] for

the vector a:

                                             y = Ua ,                                                       (4)

where           [     ...,[y(N - 1)]T ,   (aN=-[a11)0],T..,.a, nadK0u,k.q..(,na)1Qis,d..e.fi, anKedQa]Ts:,  U = [u10, ..., uK0, ...,
u1Q, ...,  y = y(0),  = ukq(0), ..., ukq
           uKQ], ukq

                               ukq(n) = x(n - q)|x(n - q)|k-1.                                              (5)

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                           Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                                    DOI: 10.1002/sat
10                                            S. DIMITROV

The least squares (LS) solution is given as:

                                          a = (UH U)-1UH y ,             (6)

and it can be used to define:

                                          M{x} = Ua ,                    (7)

After application of the already trained equalizer operator, the estimate of the received symbols

can be expressed as:                          {{                }}

                               xe(is-t 1) = Eq M x(i-1) .                (8)

  The scaled symbols are subtracted from the estimate of the received symbols to reconstruct an
estimate of the non-linear distortion noise as:

                                          d(i) = x(eis-t 1) - x¯(i-1) .  (9)

  This estimate of the interfering component is subtracted from the buffered symbols to obtain a
new set of the received symbols as output of the first iteration of non-linear distortion cancellation.
In the second iteration, the newly obtained received symbols are detected and used to better estimate
the interfering component, which is again subtracted from the originally buffered received symbols.
The improved vector of received symbols after the i-th iteration can be expressed as:

                                          x(i) = x(0) - d(i) .           (10)

  The output of this process are the newly obtained received symbols after a number of iterations.
Finally, the buffer is released and a new frame of received symbols is processed. As the iterative
symbol-based equalizer outputs symbols with reduced interference, more reliable LLRs can be
computed at the subsequently applied soft demapper, improving the performance of the decoder.

                               4. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

In this section, PER performance of the non-linear equalizer applied at the receiver is studied for
application in the satellite forward link. The satellite channel model consists of the IMUX/OMUX
filter responses and the transfer characteristic of the TWTA given in Section 2.2. A single-
carrier scenario is considered as representative of state-of-the-art satellite broadcast DTH networks,
specified as one of the four reference scenarios in the DVB-S2X implementation guidelines [2].
Constellations of 16-APSK, 32-APSK, 64-APSK, 128-APSK, and 256-APSK are simulated,
whereby one modulation order is applied per PL frame, in conjunction with a 3/4-rate LDPC code.
A carrier symbol rate of 34 MBaud with 5% roll-off factor is considered as an example of high
carrier symbol rate with low roll-off factor in the transponder bandwidth of 36 MHz, as used in
the DTH performance evaluation in [2]. In addition, non-linear distortion is added by operating the
TWTA at low OBO settings. The optimum OBO values of 1.6 dB and 2.3 dB for 16-APSK and
32-APSK, respectively, are borrowed from the single-carrier DTH scenario in [2], and expanded as
3 dB, 3.7 dB, and 4.5 dB for 64-APSK, 128-APSK, and 256-APSK, respectively.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                                 Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                                          DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.  11

  The PER performance of the fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer, applied as a standard
feature of the DVB-S2X receiver, is presented as a reference scenario. The proposed non-linear
equalizer is applied immediately after the linear equalizer. For estimation of the non-linear channel
with memory, the memory polynomial model is applied with a number of combinations of memory
and non-linear order parameters: 1) highest non-linear order of K = 3 and memory of Q = 4
taps, 2) K = 5 and Q = 6, 3) K = 5 and Q = 10, 4) K = 7 and Q = 20. Here, only the odd
non-linear orders are used in the memory polynomial model. In addition, the ideal performance
of the non-linear equalizer is simulated assuming knowledge of the exact characteristics of the
IMUX/OMUX filters and the TWTA at the receiver. These scenarios exhibit the trade-offs between
PER performance, complexity, and practicality. While more practical, channel estimation by means
of a memory polynomial model has inferior PER performance as compared to perfect channel
knowledge at the receiver. In addition, the considered scenarios for memory depth and non-
linear order of the memory polynomial models reveal the trade-off between PER performance and
complexity of the channel estimation. The PER performance of the non-linear equalizer is evaluated
for 2 iterations of non-linear distortion cancellation, shown to be provide sufficient convergence
in [11].

  The performance of the channel compensation techniques at the receiver is evaluated by means
of a Monte Carlo simulation of the PER in the satellite forward link. The PER is evaluated as a
function of the SNR defined as Psat/N , i.e., the ratio of the onboard TWTA saturation power to the
noise power, which can be related to the Es/N0 ratio in the linear domain as follows [2]:

                                          Psat = Es Rs OBO ,           (11)
                                          N  N0 Wref

where Rs is the symbol rate and Wref is the transponder bandwidth in single-carrier mode. A high
number of long PL frames are simulated, e.g., up to 106 packets per simulation point, resulting in
sufficient convergence of the statistics down to a PER of 10-3.

  The PER performance results are presented in Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 for the respective
modulation orders. In addition, the SNR requirements at PER of 10-3 are summarized in TABLE I.
The presented results of the reference linear equalizer in this paper are comparable with the results
reported in [2] in the single-carrier DTH scenario with 34-Mbaud symbol rate and 5% roll-off
for 3/4-rate 16-APSK and 32-APSK. The standard linear equalizer is unable to compensate the
transponder distortions for the higher modulation orders of 128-APSK and 256-APSK, and the
PER performance saturates. The ideal performance of the non-linear equalizer reveals SNR gains
of up to 1.79 dB for 16-APSK, 3.19 dB for 32-APSK, and 8.45 dB for 64-APSK. In addition, the
128-APSK and 256-APSK are enabled for practically achievable SNRs of 17.37 dB and 19.7 dB,
respectively. The use of the memory polynomial model for channel estimation is shown to approach
the PER performance of perfect channel knowledge at the receiver with the increase of the model
complexity, consistently across all modulation orders. While a non-linear order of up to K = 5
shows to provide sufficient representation of the nonlinearity in the channel, a higher memory depth
of up to Q = 10 is required to obtain a sweet spot between PER performance and complexity. The
memory polynomial models with lower memory depths of Q = 4 and Q = 6 show considerable
improvements of the SNR requirement of up to 4.31 dB for 64-APSK, and they manage to enable
128-APSK at 26.64 dB and 25.82 dB, respectively. Using a memory depth of Q = 10 increases the

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                      Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                               DOI: 10.1002/sat
12                                        S. DIMITROV

Figure 5. PER of 16-APSK modulation with 3/4-rate LDPC code in a single-carrier 34-Mbaud 5%-roll-off
signal in 36-MHz forward link transponder. Standard linear equalization is compared with 2 iterations of

                                                  non-linear equalization.

3/4-rate  Lin.  Non- Non-lin.                          Non-lin.  Non-lin.  Non-lin.

MODCODs EQ [2]  lin. EQ EQ (K = 3, EQ (K = 5, EQ (K = 5, EQ (K = 7,

                (ideal) Q = 4)                         Q = 6)    Q = 10)   Q = 20)

16-APSK 12.68   10.89 12.06                            12.04     11.79     11.52

32-APSK 15.77   12.58 14.68                            14.58     14.07     13.67

64-APSK 23.41   14.96 19.31                            19.1      17.93     17.06

128-APSK Saturates 17.37 26.64                         25.82     22.29     20.49

256-APSK Saturates 19.7 Saturates Saturates 30.68                          24.69

Table I. Required Psat/N [dB] at 10-3 PER of the standard linear equalizer [2] in comparison to the
additional non-linear equalizer with distortion cancellation at the receiver in a single-carrier satellite forward

                                                   link at practical OBO.

gain for 64-APSK to 5.48 dB. Furthermore, this setup reduces the SNR requirement of 128-APSK
to 22.29 dB, and even enables 256-APSK at 30.68 dB. The presented considerable improvements in
energy efficiency and the enabled use of higher-order modulation with high symbol rates close to
the limits of the transponder bandwidth, as well as very low roll-off factors, show that the proposed
non-linear equalizer is a practical solution to increase the spectral efficiency of the air interface,
which translates into increased user data rates and satellite system capacity.

  Considering the computational complexity of the receiver, the training of the memory polynomial
model requires the inversion of a matrix in (6) with size of (Q + 1)(K + 1)/2 × (Q + 1)(K + 1)/2,
using only the odd non-linear orders. This training, however, is only performed sporadically, since
the channel characteristics change only slowly over time, and therefore it can be performed offline.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.                         Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                                  DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.  13

Figure 6. PER of 32-APSK with 3/4-rate LDPC code in a single-carrier 34-Mbaud 5%-roll-off signal in
36-MHz forward link transponder. Standard linear equalization is compared with 2 iterations of non-linear

                                                         equalization.

Figure 7. PER of 64-APSK with 3/4-rate LDPC code in a single-carrier 34-Mbaud 5%-roll-off signal in
36-MHz forward link transponder. Standard linear equalization is compared with 2 iterations of non-linear

                                                         equalization.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                           DOI: 10.1002/sat
14                                        S. DIMITROV

Figure 8. PER of 128-APSK with 3/4-rate LDPC code in a single-carrier 34-Mbaud 5%-roll-off signal in
36-MHz forward link transponder. Standard linear equalization is compared with 2 iterations of non-linear

                                                         equalization.

Figure 9. PER of 256-APSK with 3/4-rate LDPC code in a single-carrier 34-Mbaud 5%-roll-off signal in
36-MHz forward link transponder. Standard linear equalization is compared with 2 iterations of non-linear

                                                         equalization.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.               Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                        DOI: 10.1002/sat
EST. AND CANC. OF TRANSP. DISTORT. IN SAT. FORW. LINKS U. MEM. POLYN.  15

Therefore, the computational complexity of the non-linear equalizer using the memory polynomial
model for channel estimation and distortion cancellation is dominated by (8). Therefore, the receiver
complexity remains linear with the size of the model, (Q + 1)(K + 1)/2, for a given number of
iterations [11]. Given the fact that a small-size memory polynomial model with Q = 10 and K = 5
already provides sufficient performance in the non-linear channel with memory, this implementation
of the non-linear equalizer further reduces the complexity in comparison to the implementation with
perfect channel knowledge at the receiver. As a result, low-cost receiver devices.

                                                5. CONCLUSION

In this paper, the symbol-based equalizer with non-linear distortion cancellation has been analyzed
in a practical setup, including channel estimation at the receiver by means of a memory polynomial
model. The improved receiver is particularly suitable for application with wide-band carriers, low
roll-off factors, high symbol baud rates, and high-order modulations. The PER performance of the
receiver has been assessed for a single-carrier 36-MHz transponder with 34-MBaud symbol rate
and 5% roll-off, similar to DTH broadcasting, using a 3/4-rate LDPC code and modulation orders
of 16-APSK, 32-APSK, 64-APSK, 128-APSK, and 256-APSK. Varying the memory depth and the
non-linear order of the memory polynomial model, the PER performance of the non-linear equalizer
is studied against the standard fractionally-space adaptive linear equalizer, as well as to a setup of
the non-linear equalizer with knowledge of the characteristics of the IMUX/OMUX filters and the
TWTA at the receiver, in order to evaluate the trade-off between PER performance and complexity.
The practical receiver is shown to consistently approach the PER performance of the setup with ideal
channel knowledge when increasing the memory depth and the non-linear order. While the standard
fractionally-spaced adaptive linear equalizer saturates the PER performance beyond 64-APSK, the
non-linear equalizer not only achieves significant energy efficiency gains up to 5.48 dB for 64-
APSK, but also enables the use of higher-order modulation like 128-APSK and 256-APSK, using
a memory polynomial model with memory depth of 10 and non-linear order of 5. The significant
energy and spectral efficiency gains promote the proposed equalizer as an effective solution at the
receiver in the non-linear satellite channel with memory, enabling the increase of both user rates and
system capacity.

                                                        ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work has been supported by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research under contract
16KIS0740. Responsibility for the contents of this publication lies with the author. (Das diesem Bericht
zugrundeliegende Vorhaben wurde mit Mitteln des Bundesministeriums fu¨r Bildung und Forschung unter
dem Fo¨rderkennzeichen 16KIS0740 gefo¨rdert. Die Verantwortung fu¨r den Inhalt dieser Vero¨ffentlichung
liegt beim Autor.)

                                                            REFERENCES

1. Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services,
   news gathering and other broadband satellite applications; part ii: S2-extensions (dvb-s2x) Oct 2014.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                           DOI: 10.1002/sat
16                                        S. DIMITROV

 2. Implementation guidelines for the second generation system for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering
     and other broadband satellite applications; part ii: S2-extensions (dvb-s2x) Mar 2015.

 3. Karam G, Sari H. Analysis of predistortion, equalization, and ISI cancellation techniques in digital radio systems
     with nonlinear transmit amplifiers. IEEE Trans. Commun. Dec 1989; 37(12):1245­1253.

 4. Yu C, Guan L, Zhu E, Zhu A. Band-limited Volterra series-based digital predistortion for wideband RF power
     amplifiers. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn. Dec 2012; 60(12):4198­4208.

 5. Kelly N, Allegue-Martinez M, Arapoglou PD, Zhu A. Bandwidth-constrained digital pre-distortion technique for
     multi-carrier satellite communications. Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw. Apr 2015; .

 6. Casini E, De Gaudenzi R, Ginesi A. DVB-S2 modem algorithms design and performance over typical satellite
     channels. Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw. Jun 2004; 22:281­318.

 7. Ding L, Zhou GT, Morgan DR, Ma Z, Kenney JS, Kim J, Giardina CR. A robust digital baseband predistorter
     constructed using memory polynomials. IEEE Trans. Commun. Jan 2004; 52(1):159­165.

 8. Zhou D, DeBrunner VE. Novel adaptive nonlinear predistorters based on the direct learning algorithm. IEEE Trans.
     on Signal Proces. Jan 2007; 55(1):120­133.

 9. Karam G, Sari H. A data pre-distortion technique with memory for QAM radio systems. IEEE Trans. Commun.
     Aug 1991; 39(2):336­344.

10. Piazza R, Bhavani Shankar MR, Ottersten B. Data Predistortion for Multicarrier Satellite Channels Based on Direct
     Learning. IEEE Trans. Signal Proces. Nov 2014; 62(22):5868­5880.

11. Dimitrov S. Non-Linear Distortion Cancellation and Symbol-Based Equalization in Satellite Forward Links. IEEE
     Trans. Wireless Commun. 2017; 16(7):4489­4502.

12. Proakis J. Digital Communications. 4th edn., McGraw Hill, 2000.
13. Ampeliotis D, Rontogiannis AA, Berberidis K, Papaleo M, Corazza GE. Turbo equalization of non-linear

     satellite channels using soft interference cancellation. Proc. 4th Advanced Satellite Mobile Systems Conference
     (ASMS2008), Bologna, Italy, 2008; 289­292.
14. Dimitrov S. Iterative cancellation of non-linear distortion noise in digital communication systems. IEEE Trans.
     Commun. Jun 2015; 63(6):2325­2336.
15. Biglieri E, Barberis S, Catena M. Analysis and compensation of nonlinearities in digital transmission systems. IEEE
     J. Sel. Areas Commun. Jan 1988; 6(1):42­51.
16. Kim J, Konstantinou K. Digital predistortion of wideband signals based on power amplifier model with memory.
     Electron. Lett. Nov 2001; 37:1417­1418.
17. Dimitrov S. Non-linear distortion noise cancellation for satellite return links. Proc. IEEE International Conference
     on Communications (IEEE ICC 2016), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2016.
18. Dimitrov S. Non-linear distortion noise cancellation for satellite forward links. Proc. 8th Advanced Satellite
     Multimedia Systems Conference (ASMS2016), Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2016.

Copyright c 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.               Int. J. Satell. Commun. Network. (2018)
Prepared using satauth.cls                                                        DOI: 10.1002/sat
